Docs: Add first draft for tutorial (#4070)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/tutorial/basic.rst

    uuid         eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8
    label
    description
    ctime        2020-05-13 08:58:15.193421+00:00
    mtime        2020-05-13 08:58:40.976821+00:00

Once again, we can see that the node is of type ``Int``, as PK = 1, and UUID = ``eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8``. Besides this information, the ``verdi node show`` command also shows the (empty) ``label`` and ``description``, as well as the time the node was created (``ctime``) and last modified (``mtime``).

.. note:: Although AiiDA already provides many data types, you can also :ref:`create your own<how-to:data:plugin>`.

Calculation functions
=====================

Once your data is stored in the database, it is ready to be used for some computational task.
For example, let's say you want to multiply two ``Int`` data nodes.
The following Python function:

.. code-block:: python

    def multiply(x, y):
        return x * y

will give the desired result when applied to two ``Int`` nodes, but the calculation will not be stored in the provenance.
However, AiiDA ships with a handy ``decorator`` that you can add to any Python function so its execution will be stored in the provenance.

> Start up the AiiDA IPython shell again using ``verdi shell`` and execute the following code snippet:

Author: Agreed! I originally left out the prompts because they were also copied with the `sphinx-copybutton`, but @chrisjsewell is working on fixing this with regexes.

At the end of this tutorial you will know how to:

* Store data in the database and subsequently retrieve it.
* Decorate a Python function such that its inputs and outputs are automatically tracked.
* Run and monitor the status of processes.
* Explore and visualize the provenance graph.

.. important::

    If you are working on your own machine, note that tutorial assumes that you have a working AiiDA installation, and have set up your AiiDA profile in the current Python environment.
    If this is not the case, consult the :ref:`getting started page<intro/get_started>`.

Provenance
==========

Before we dive in, we need to briefly introduce one of the most important concepts for AiiDA: *provenance*.
An AiiDA database does not only contain the results of your calculations, but also their inputs and each step that was executed to obtain them.
All of this information is stored in the form of a *directed acyclic graph* (DAG).
As an example, :numref:`fig_intro_workchain_graph` shows the provenance of the calculations of this tutorial.

.. _fig_intro_workchain_graph:
.. figure:: include/workchain_graph.png
    :scale: 30
    :align: center

>     Provenance Graph of a basic AiiDA WorkChain.

Author: Good point! As clicking on the image opens the `.png` file, I think the only way to fix this is by adding the same background color to the images as that of the docs (#FCFCFC). I've fixed the backgrounds with some image magick. :)

>     Provenance Graph of a basic AiiDA WorkChain.

Reviewer: Yeh I was going to say that you could try adding a CSS class, that sets the background color:

```rst
.. figure:: include/workchain_graph.png
    :scale: 30
    :align: center
    :class: bg-white
```

But I guess this won't work when opening it

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi computer setup -L tutor -H localhost -T local -S direct -w `echo $PWD/work` -n
        $ verdi computer configure local tutor --safe-interval 5 -n

    The first commands sets up the computer with the following options:

    * *label* (``-L``): tutor
    * *hostname* (``-H``): localhost
    * *transport* (``-T``): local
    * *scheduler* (``-S``): direct
    * *work-dir* (``-w``): The ``work`` subdirectory of the current directory

    The second command *configures* the computer with a minimum interval between connections (``--safe-interval``) of 5 seconds.
    For both commands, the *non-interactive* option (``-n``) is added to not prompt for extra input.

    Next, let's set up the code we're going to use for the tutorial:

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi code setup -L add --on-computer --computer=tutor -P arithmetic.add --remote-abs-path=/bin/bash -n

    This command sets up a code with *label* ``add`` on the *computer* ``tutor``, using the *plugin* ``arithmetic.add``.

.. note::
    A typical real-world example of a computer is a remote supercomputing facility.

>     Codes can be anything from a Python script to powerful *ab initio* codes such as Quantum Espresso or machine learning tools like Tensorflow.

Author: Fair point! I've changed the note to a paragraph.

Regarding the spacing, I now use a pipe `|` to add some spacing, but it seems like it adds a little too much. Is there a better way of doing this?

>     Codes can be anything from a Python script to powerful *ab initio* codes such as Quantum Espresso or machine learning tools like Tensorflow.

Reviewer: when you change from `accordion` to `dropdown` you won't have this problem. You can even go wild and style them with any of the bootstrap classes: 

- https://sphinx-panels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#dropdown-usage
- https://sphinx-panels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#card-styling

Let's have a look at the codes that are available to us:

.. code:: console

    $ verdi code list

You can see a single code ``add@tutor``, with PK = 5, in the printed list.
This code allows us to add two integers together.
The ``add@tutor`` identifier indicates that the code with label ``add`` is run on the computer with label ``tutor``.
To see more details about the computer, you can use the following ``verdi`` command:

.. code:: console

    $ verdi computer show tutor

> 

Author: Alright, I've added the output. It's probably a good idea to also explain the fact that the `tutor` computer has PK = 1, same as the ``Int`` node that they made at the start of the tutorial. I know that nodes, computers and groups are different types of entities in the database. Is that why they can have the same PK? How would I best explain this in the tutorial?

> 

Reviewer 2: I actually didn't know that and cannot provide any guidance on this. Maybe @sphuber can help? So far we've been promoting the message that PKs are unique within the profile space.

> 

Reviewer 3: Yes, the PKs are unique for each profile for each "entity" as long as they are stored in a separate database table, simply because they are the unique identifiers in said table. The following entities have their own table, AuthInfo, Comment, Computer, Group, Node, Link, Log, Node, Setting and User, and so they have their own unique set of pks. Note that sublcasses of each entity are stored in the same table.

Of course we should not explain it in this way or with this amount of details to the user. The most relevant entities for a user would be Computer, Group and Node. So maybe we can add a quick note where we say that PKs are unique to each database, that they are even unique within a database for different entities.

> 

Reviewer 2: For those users familiar with databases, it will make immediate sense that the primary key (PK) is unique for a given table and that computers and nodes, etc. are stored in different tables and can therefore have overlapping PKs.

So let's make sure that we mention this such that "expert" users can contextualize this and for all other users we will just say that PKs are unique to each profile for each "class".

> 

Author: I was thinking of adding a note after they see the output of `verdi computer show tutor`, as they will probably wonder about the PK at that point. Something along the lines of:

```
.. note:: 

    You may have noticed that the PK of the ``tutor`` computer is 1, same as the ``Int`` node we created at the start of this tutorial.
    This is because different entities, such as nodes, computers and groups, are stored in different tables of the database.
    So, the PKs for each entity type are unique for each database, but entities of different types can have the same PK within one database.
```

Note that the *Work directory* has been set up as the ``work`` subdirectory of the current directory.
This is the directory in which the calculations running on the ``tutor`` computer will be executed.

Let's now start up the ``verdi shell`` again and load the ``add@tutor`` code using its label:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: code = load_code(label='add')

> Every code has a convenient tool for setting up the required input, called the builder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every code has a convenient tool for setting up the required input, called the *builder*.
```

It can be obtained by using the ``get_builder`` method:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [2]: builder = code.get_builder()

Using the builder, you can easily set up the calculation by directly providing the input arguments.

> Let's use the ``Int`` node that was created by our previous ``calcfunction`` as one of the inputs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's use the ``Int`` node that was created by our previous ``calcfunction`` as one of the inputs and a new node as the second input:
```

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [3]: builder.x = load_node(pk=4)

Reviewer 2: Is there a good way to figure out which PK to use here in case that mine differs from the tutorial?

Author: Perhaps a good way to help the user load the output node from the calculation function in case they have forgotten the PK is by having them copy the UUID from the provenance chart they have generated and use e.g.

```
In [3]: builder.x = load_node(uuid='42541d38')
```

That way they can immediately see that you can also use the UUID to load a node. I suppose it might be confusing that you don't use the _whole_ UUID, but we can explain that as well.

Maybe there is a much easier way that I'm missing though.

Reviewer 2: No, I think it's worth expounding on the relationship between PKs and UUIDs just a little bit. So I am in favor of this change.

>     In [3]: builder.x = load_node(pk=4)
>        ...: builder.y = Int(5)

Reviewer 2: The prompt doesn't look right to me.
```suggestion
    In [3]: builder.x = load_node(pk=4)
    In [4]: builder.y = Int(5)
```

Author: This is what the prompt looks like when you copy-paste a code snippet into the IPython shell. Once the `sphinx-copybutton` extension has been supplied with regexes for the various prompts by @chrisjsewell, I think this is what the users will see if they use the button to copy the code block and paste it into the shell. I'm happy to change it though, if you think this prompt is confusing for the user.

Reviewer 2: No, that's ok. As long as it looks exactly like it would if copy & pasted, everything is fine.

.. note::

    One nifty feature of the builder is the ability to use tab completion for the inputs.
    Try it out by typing ``builder.`` + ``<TAB>`` in the verdi shell.

To execute the ``CalcJob``, we use the ``run`` function provided by the AiiDA engine:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [4]: from aiida.engine import run

>        ...: run(builder)

Reviewer 2: This command failed for me with:
```
ValueError: Error occurred validating port 'inputs.metadata.options.resources': required value was not provided for 'resources'
```

Author: This is because the changes I've made to the `ArithmeticAddCalculation` calculation job aren't implemented in this branch.

I'll be doing a PR for the demo processes into `develop` once we're entirely settled on them, and the tests have been updated. However, apparently implementing a test for a calculation job is not a trivial task, so @sphuber is going to help me with that. ^^

Reviewer 2: Ok, sounds good. However, we will have to run a final test on a released AiiDA version before we can publish the revised documentation.

>        ...: run(builder)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In [5]: run(builder)
```

Wait for the process to complete.

> Once it is done, it will return a dictionary with the output nodes.

Reviewer 2: Show?

Let's first check the status of the daemon using the ``verdi`` CLI:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi daemon status

If the daemon is running, the output will be something like the following:

.. code-block:: bash

    Profile: tutorial
    Daemon is running as PID 96447 since 2020-05-22 18:04:39
    Active workers [1]:
      PID    MEM %    CPU %  started
    -----  -------  -------  -------------------
    96448    0.507        0  2020-05-22 18:04:39
    Use verdi daemon [incr | decr] [num] to increase / decrease the amount of workers

In this case, let's stop it for now:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi daemon stop

Next, let's *submit* the ``CalcJob`` we ran previously.
Start the ``verdi shell`` and execute the Python code snippet below.
This follows all the steps we did previously, but now uses the ``submit`` function instead of ``run``:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: from aiida.engine import submit
       ...:
       ...: code = load_code(label='add')
       ...: builder = code.get_builder()
       ...: builder.x = load_node(pk=4)
       ...: builder.y = Int(5)
       ...:

>        ...: submit(builder)

Reviewer 2: Same question as before, why not execute those commands on separate code lines?

> Note that the submission finishes very quickly, and that it returns the ``CalcJob`` that was just submitted:

Reviewer 2: Why should we note that the submission finishes very quickly?

Author: I've rephrased this using one of the sentences that @sphuber suggested for the explanation on the difference between the ``run`` and ``submit`` functions for the how-to on running workflows.

                spec.outline(cls.multiply, cls.add, cls.result)
                spec.output('result', valid_type=Int)

            def multiply(self):
                """Multiply two integers."""
                self.ctx.multiple = multiply(self.inputs.x, self.inputs.y)

            def add(self):
                """Add two numbers with the ArithmeticAddCalculation process."""

                builder = self.inputs.code.get_builder()

                builder.x = self.ctx.multiple
                builder.y = self.inputs.z

                future = self.submit(builder)

                return ToContext({'addition': future})

            def result(self):
                self.out('result', self.ctx['addition'].get_outgoing().get_node_by_label('sum'))

    First, we recognize the ``multiply`` function we have used earlier, decorated as a ``calcfunction``.
    The ``define`` class method specifies the ``input`` and ``output`` of the ``WorkChain``, as well as the ``outline``, which are the steps of the workflow.
    These steps are provided as methods of the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain`` class.

.. note::

    Besides WorkChain's, workflows can also be implemented as *work functions*.

>     These are ideal for workflows that are not very computationally intensive and can be easily implemented in a Python function.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to add some space after the dropdown:
![Screen Shot 2020-05-25 at 2 35 48 PM 1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1441208/82813332-1fdb4180-9e95-11ea-87f4-2ae261235cbd.png)

Now quickly leave the IPython shell and check the process list:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi process list -a

Depending on which step the workflow is running, you should get something like the following:

.. code-block:: bash

      PK  Created    Process label             Process State    Process status
    ----  ---------  ------------------------  ---------------  ------------------------------------
       3  7m ago     multiply                  ⏹ Finished [0]
       7  3m ago     ArithmeticAddCalculation  ⏹ Finished [0]
      12  2m ago     ArithmeticAddCalculation  ⏹ Finished [0]
      19  16s ago    MultiplyAddWorkChain      ⏵ Waiting        Waiting for child processes: 22
      20  16s ago    multiply                  ⏹ Finished [0]
      22  15s ago    ArithmeticAddCalculation  ⏵ Waiting        Waiting for transport task: retrieve

    Total results: 6

    Info: last time an entry changed state: 0s ago (at 09:08:59 on 2020-05-13)

We can see that the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain`` is currently waiting for its *child process*, the ``ArithmeticAddCalculation``, to finish.
Check the process list again for *all* processes (You should know how by now!).

> Now all the processes should be in the ``Finished`` state.

Reviewer 2: Meaning we should wait until they all finish or should they be all finished after checking the processes?

    Out[2]: <Int: uuid: eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8 (unstored) value: 2>

Quite a bit of information on our freshly created node is returned:

* The data node is of the type ``Int``
* The node has the *universally unique identifier* (**UUID**) ``eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8``
* The node is currently not stored in the database ``(unstored)``
* The integer value of the node is ``2``

Let's store the node in the database:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: node.store()
    Out[3]: <Int: uuid: eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8 (pk: 1) value: 2>

As you can see, the data node has now been assigned a *primary key* (**PK**), a number that identifies the node in your database ``(pk: 1)``.
The PK and UUID both reference the node with the only difference that the PK is unique *for your local database only*, whereas the UUID is a globally unique identifier and can therefore be used between *different* databases.
Use the PK only if you are working within a single database, i.e. in an interactive session and the UUID in all other cases.

.. important::

    The PK numbers shown throughout this tutorial assume that you start from a completely empty database.

>     It is possible that the nodes' PKs will be different for your database!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It is possible that the nodes' PKs will be different for your database!

    The UUIDs are generated randomly and are therefore **guaranteed** to be different.
```
I guess users could also be confused as to why the UUIDs are different...

Next, let's leave the IPython shell by typing ``exit()`` and then enter.
Back in the terminal, use the ``verdi`` command line interface (CLI) to check the data node we have just created:

.. code:: console

    $ verdi node show 1

This prints something like the following:

.. code-block:: bash

    Property     Value
    -----------  ------------------------------------
    type         Int
    pk           1
    uuid         eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8
    label
    description
    ctime        2020-05-13 08:58:15.193421+00:00
    mtime        2020-05-13 08:58:40.976821+00:00

> Once again, we can see that the node is of type ``Int``, as PK = 1, and UUID = ``eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once again, we can see that the node is of type ``Int``, has PK = 1, and UUID = ``eac48d2b-ae20-438b-aeab-2d02b69eb6a8``.
```

    Total results: 1

    Info: last time an entry changed state: 1m ago (at 09:01:05 on 2020-05-13)

We can see that our ``multiply`` calcfunction was created 1 minute ago, assigned the PK 3, and has ``Finished``.

As a final step, let's have a look at the provenance of this simple calculation.
The provenance graph can be automatically generated using the verdi CLI.
Let's generate the provenance graph for the ``multiply`` calculation function we have just run with PK = 3:

.. code-block:: console

  $ verdi node graph generate 3

The command will write the provenance graph to a ``.pdf`` file.
Use your favorite PDF viewer to have a look.
It should look something like the graph shown in :numref:`fig_calcfun_graph`.

.. _fig_calcfun_graph:
.. figure:: include/calcfun_graph.png
    :scale: 50
    :align: center

    Provenance graph of the ``multiply`` calculation function.

.. note:: Remember that the PK of the ``CalcJob`` can be different for your database.

CalcJobs
========

When running calculations that require an external code or run on a remote machine, a simple calculation function is no longer sufficient.
For this purpose, AiiDA provides the ``CalcJob`` process class.

> To run a ``CalcJob``, you need to set up two things: a ``computer`` for the calculation to run on, and the ``code`` that you want the ``CalcJob`` to run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run a ``CalcJob``, you need to set up two things: a ``code`` that is going to implement the desired calculation and a ``computer`` for the calculation to run on.
```
Not 100% sure about my suggested formulation, but I found the previous sentence a bit convoluted and thus confusing.

.. note::

    You may have noticed that the PK of the ``tutor`` computer is 1, same as the ``Int`` node we created at the start of this tutorial.
    This is because different entities, such as nodes, computers and groups, are stored in different tables of the database.
    So, the PKs for each entity type are unique for each database, but entities of different types can have the same PK within one database.

Let's now start up the ``verdi shell`` again and load the ``add@tutor`` code using its label:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: code = load_code(label='add')

Every code has a convenient tool for setting up the required input, called the *builder*.
It can be obtained by using the ``get_builder`` method:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [2]: builder = code.get_builder()

Using the builder, you can easily set up the calculation by directly providing the input arguments.
Let's use the ``Int`` node that was created by our previous ``calcfunction`` as one of the inputs and a new node as the second input:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: builder.x = load_node(pk=4)
       ...: builder.y = Int(5)

> In case your nodes' PKs are different, and you don't remember the PK of the output node from the previous calculation, you can also check the provenance graph you have generated and use the start of the UUID of the output node:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case that your nodes' PKs are different and you don't remember the PK of the output node from the previous calculation, check the provenance graph you generated earlier and use the UUID of the output node instead:
```

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: builder.x = load_node(uuid='42541d38')
       ...: builder.y = Int(5)

Note that you don't have to provide the entire UUID to load the node.
As long as the first part of the UUID is unique within your database, AiiDA will find the node you are looking for.

.. note::

    One nifty feature of the builder is the ability to use tab completion for the inputs.
    Try it out by typing ``builder.`` + ``<TAB>`` in the verdi shell.

To execute the ``CalcJob``, we use the ``run`` function provided by the AiiDA engine:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [4]: from aiida.engine import run
       ...: run(builder)

Wait for the process to complete.
Once it is done, it will return a dictionary with the output nodes:

.. code-block:: ipython

    Out[6]:
    {'sum': <Int: uuid: 7d5d781e-8f17-498a-b3d5-dbbd3488b935 (pk: 8) value: 11>,
    'remote_folder': <RemoteData: uuid: 888d654a-65fb-4da0-b3bc-d63f0374f274 (pk: 9)>,
    'retrieved': <FolderData: uuid: 4733aa78-2e2f-4aeb-8e09-c5cfb58553db (pk: 10s)>}

Besides the sum of the two ``Int`` nodes, the calculation function also returns two other outputs: one of type ``RemoteData`` and one of type ``FolderData``.

> See the `topics section on calculation jobs <topics:calculations:usage:calcfunctions>` for more details.

Reviewer 2: This link is broken.

Instead of the *result* of the calculation, it returns the node of the ``CalcJob`` that was just submitted:

.. code-block:: ipython

    Out[1]: <CalcJobNode: uuid: e221cf69-5027-4bb4-a3c9-e649b435393b (pk: 12) (aiida.calculations:arithmetic.add)>

Let's exit the IPython shell and have a look at the process list:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi process list

You should see the ``CalcJob`` you have just submitted, with the state ``Created``:

.. code-block:: bash

      PK  Created    Process label             Process State    Process status
    ----  ---------  ------------------------  ---------------  ----------------
      12  13s ago    ArithmeticAddCalculation  ⏹ Created

    Total results: 1

    Info: last time an entry changed state: 13s ago (at 09:06:57 on 2020-05-13)

The ``CalcJob`` process is now waiting to be picked up by a daemon runner, but the daemon is currently disabled.
Let's start it up (again):

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi daemon start

Now you can either use ``verdi process list`` to follow the execution of the ``CalcJob``, or ``watch`` its progress:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi process watch 12

> Let's wait for the ``CalcJob` to complete and then use ``verdi process list -a`` to see all processes we have run so far:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's wait for the ``CalcJob`` to complete and then use ``verdi process list -a`` to see all processes we have run so far:
```

            def add(self):
                """Add two numbers with the ArithmeticAddCalculation process."""

                builder = self.inputs.code.get_builder()

                builder.x = self.ctx.multiple
                builder.y = self.inputs.z

                future = self.submit(builder)

                return ToContext({'addition': future})

            def result(self):
                self.out('result', self.ctx['addition'].get_outgoing().get_node_by_label('sum'))

    First, we recognize the ``multiply`` function we have used earlier, decorated as a ``calcfunction``.
    The ``define`` class method specifies the ``input`` and ``output`` of the ``WorkChain``, as well as the ``outline``, which are the steps of the workflow.
    These steps are provided as methods of the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain`` class.

.. note::

    Besides WorkChain's, workflows can also be implemented as *work functions*.
    These are ideal for workflows that are not very computationally intensive and can be easily implemented in a Python function.

Let's run the ``WorkChain`` above!
Start up the ``verdi shell`` and import the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain``:

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: from aiida.workflows.multiplyadd import MultiplyAddWorkChain

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we use a factory function here instead?

Author: Good point! I didn't know how to add an entry point when I first wrote the tutorial. ^^ I've also added a short sentence on the ``WorkflowFactory``. Have a look and see if you think it's clear/sufficient.
